---
layout: post
title: "030: Brenna Bhandar, 'Use' in <em>Colonial Lives of Property: Law, Land, and Racial Regimes of Ownership</em> (Durham: Duke University Press, 2018), 33-76."
date: 2025-05-04
---
This chapter explores the flexible and variable nature of the relationship between use and ownership. Historically speaking, this relationship was especially traceable to the common-law jurisdiction, which proposed "cultivation" as a key act to justify ownership rights in the context of English agrarian capitalism. This proposition sought to define people as uncivilized and land as unproductive in relation to agricultural production. In this regard, the unproductive land was deemed waste, and it called for improvement. The ideological juggernaut brought devastating consequences for populations that practiced subsistence. It was usually followed by land dispossession and forced migration to those who did not engage in marketized forms of cultivation. This notion of improvement was at the center of many land struggles across the world, especially for Indigenous people in the context of settler colonies.

Bhendar traces the origin of this idea through the work of William Petty, who was partly influenced by Francis Bacon. Petty's idea constituted an early labor theory of value, as he connected the relation between land and labor. His idea became influential in the colonization of Ireland. Bhendar also discussed the difference between Petty's thinking and Locke, the latter being the one who turned the ideology of improvement into the laws of property used later in the 18th and 19th centuries by European colonial powers to justify their colonial occupation. Bhendar then sought to read traces of this proposition in the context of British Columbia to argue how this notion of the racial regime of ownership was grafted into the doctrine of improvement that shaped land rights in the province.

Bhandar traces the history way back to 
