---
layout: post
title: "031: David Harvey, <em>Abstract from the Concrete</em> (Sternberg Press, 2016)"
date: 2025-05-04
---
This was a lecture that was transcribed and edited into a book, which made it easy to read in one go. Despite its simplicity, the book has many interesting points that are derived from Marxism.

Harvey's main argument is that "not only do crises get moved around, but crises are embedded in the very structures of what capital accumulation is about." This refers to the fact that capitalism is invested in the production of commodity, yet for the commodity to have value, it has to maintain demand. Thus, "The history of capital is, therefore, about the production of new wants, needs, and desires." (55) To support this point, Harvey uses cases such as the transformation of Paris (Haussmann), the suburbs in the United States, and the construction in contemporary China.

Another key term that Harvey uses is "spatial fix." This term refers to the idea that when there are surpluses of capital and labor in a particular territory, then capitalists began to move their surplus capital to build elsewhere. (65) This explains European colonialism as much as the current construction export from China.

Harvey goes on to question the "why," and for him the "why" is very simple: capital is about accumulation for accumulation's sake. This means "pouring more and more cement everywhere until we are u[p to our necks in the stuff," all for the sake of economic growth. (95)

Another key moment in this book is when Harvey criticizes the focus of Marxism on the politics of production. He argues that capital can extract wealth as much from the realization process as from the production process. Workers may earn more wage, but it doesn't matter if he goes home and pays higher costs for rents and other things that he needs to sustain his life. And in practice, the realization of values under the era of accumulation relied on the production of new wants, needs, and desires. As a lot of wealth is being extracted from the realization process, hence the need of politics of realization. This means that political struggle should not only be in the domain of production. Harvey posits, "The struggle is between buyers and sellers rather than between labor and capital." (109) 
