---
layout: post
title: "028: Richard B. Sheridan, 'The Formation of Caribbean Plantation Society, 1689-1748' in <em>The Oxford History of the British Empire: Volume II</em> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 394-414"
date: 2025-05-01
---
I read this text to get a glimpse of plantation life in the West Indies. Many of the features in this context were similar to the characteristics in Colonial Sumatra in the 19th century. Sheridan suggests that the rise of the plantation economy in Barbados, one of the important islands that became key producers of sugar, was followed by several changes, including: 1. The transformation of subsistence farming to labor- and capital-intensive plantations; 2. Dependence upon foodstuff, building materials, goods, and services from outside sources; 3. Shift in labor force from white indentured servants to chattel slaves from Africa; 4. The rise of a wealthy planter governing oligarchy with close ties with the metropolis; 5. Emergence of sugar colonies as major geopolitical forces in the Atlantic world.

There are, nevertheless, some key differences. When it comes to scale, peak-stage plantations in Colonial Sumatra far surpassed the size and number of workers of the plantation estates in the West Indies, which ranged from as little as eighty to as much as 2,000 or more acres of land, and from forty to 500 or more slave laborers. There seemed to be more connections between the metropole and the colony in Colonial Sumatra, considering that many of the plantations in Sumatra were run by boards of directors from their headquarters in the Netherlands. Whereas the West Indies plantations connected the metropolis, Africa, North America, and Spanish America, the plantations in Sumatra--and the Dutch East Indies in general--connected the colony with the Netherlands, North America, and China (main source of workers). Sheridan also mentioned the problem of soil fertility following constant cropping of cane, which was remediated by constructing terraces to catch the mould that was washed from cane fields. This is probably the most important difference: as colonial plantations in Sumatra managed to secure large tracts of land, they could appropriate the shifting cultivation technique used by local residents and different forms of reboization to rejuvenate soil quality.
