---
layout: post
title: "029: Cyrus Veeser, 'A Forgotten Instrument of Global Capitalism? International Concessions, 1870–1930' <em>The International History Review</em> 35 No. 5 (2013): 1136-1155"
date: 2025-05-03
---
Concessions were a global phenomenon from the mid-1800s through the 1930s. They were "an essential device for integrating the world economy during what has been called the first era of globalization." Yet little comparative and systematic work analyzes concessions, hence this article.

Veeser shows that concessions emerged as an instrument of foreign investments in the developing world. They came in different forms, but the most common type was developmental. In this case, the governments of sovereign states seeking to pursue economic modernization or imperial powers wanting to push the economic growth of their colonies granted concessions to private companies or individuals. The key function of this form of agreement was to create "a legal microclimate" that bridged the gap between the legal systems of less-developed states and industrial nations. Concessions were also used to secure property rights in less-developed states. They supplied, on the one hand, a congenial legal order, and on the other hand, an attractive investment.

Veeser's key contribution is in pointing out the role of concessions in bridging the gap between the grantor and grantee. Yet what is missing in his point is how concessions served as a legal instrument to claim ownership over lands in the colony. For instance, in the context of the Dutch East Indies, the mobilization of concessions was marked by the declaration of wastelands, thus enabling imperial powers/local rulers to lease those lands to private companies or individuals. As such, in the colony, concessions became embedded in the doctrine of improvement. They shared a parallel function with enclosure acts in Europe. Concessions also allowed the colonial government to compensate for the lack of control in princely states. By using land concessions, local rulers and private companies/entrepreneurs could conclude land agreements with minimal presence of the colonial government.

Note: Thanks to Jonathan Robins for suggesting this article.
